Markov Analysis

If you choose words from emma.txt at random, you can get a sense of the vocabulary,
but you probably won’t get a sentence:
this the small regard harriet which knightley's it most things

A series of random words seldom makes sense because there is no relationship
between successive words. For example, in a real sentence you would expect an article
like “the” to be followed by an adjective or a noun, and probably not a verb or adverb.
One way to measure these kinds of relationships is Markov analysis, which character‐
izes, for a given sequence of words, the probability of the words that might come
next. For example, the second chapter of The Little Prince (1943), the famous novella
written by French writer and pioneer aviator Antoine de Saint-Exupéry, begins:

The first night, then, I went to sleep on the sand, a thousand miles from any human
habitation. I was more isolated than a shipwrecked sailor on a raft in the middle of the
ocean. Thus you can imagine my amazement, at sunrise, when I was awakened by an
odd little voice. It said:
“If you please–draw me a sheep!”
“What!”
“Draw me a sheep!”
I jumped to my feet, completely thunderstruck. I blinked my eyes hard. I looked care‐
fully all around me. And I saw a most extraordinary small person, who stood there
examining me with great seriousness. (...)
Now I stared at this sudden apparition with my eyes fairly starting out of my head in
astonishment. Remember, I had crashed in the desert a thousand miles from any
inhabited region. And yet my little man seemed neither to be straying uncertainly
among the sands, nor to be fainting from fatigue or hunger or thirst or fear. Nothing
about him gave any suggestion of a child lost in the middle of the desert, a thousand
miles from any human habitation. When at last I was able to speak, I said to him:
“But–what are you doing here?”
And in answer he repeated, very slowly, as if he were speaking of a matter of great con‐
sequence:
“If you please–draw me a sheep...”
When a mystery is too overpowering, one dare not disobey. Absurd as it might seem to
me, a thousand miles from any human habitation and in danger of death, I took out of
my pocket a sheet of paper and my fountain-pen. But then I remembered how my
studies had been concentrated on geography, history, arithmetic, and grammar, and I
told the little chap (a little crossly, too) that I did not know how to draw. He answered
me:
“That doesn’t matter. Draw me a sheep...”
But I had never drawn a sheep. So I drew for him one of the two pictures I had drawn
so often. It was that of the boa constrictor from the outside. And I was astounded to
hear the little fellow greet it with,
“No, no, no! I do not want an elephant inside a boa constrictor. A boa constrictor is a
very dangerous creature, and an elephant is very cumbersome. Where I live, every‐
thing is very small. What I need is a sheep. Draw me a sheep.”

In this text, the word “draw” is always followed by the word “me,” and the phrase
“draw me” is always followed by “a sheep.” And the phrase “a thousand” is always fol‐
lowed by “miles,” but the phrase “a thousand miles” may be followed by “from any
human habitation” or by “from any inhabited region.”

The result of Markov analysis is a mapping from each prefix (like “draw me” and “a
thousand miles”) to all possible suffixes (like “a sheep” and “from any habitation” or
“from any inhabited region”).

Given this mapping, you can generate a random text by starting with any prefix and
choosing at random from the possible suffixes. Next, you can combine the end of the
prefix and the new suffix to form the next prefix, and repeat.

For example, if you start with the prefix “draw me,” then the next word has to be “a
sheep,” because the prefix is always followed by “a sheep” in the text. If a prefix is “a
thousand miles,” the next suffix might be “from any habitation” or “from any inhabi‐
ted region.”

In this example the lengths of the prefixes are two or three, but you can do Markov
analysis with any prefix length.

